# Networking in Kubernetes

## Cluster Networking

So it's all easy and simple to understand when it comes to networking on a single node. But how does it work when you have multipel nodes in a cluster? In this case, we have two nodes running kubernetes and they have different IP addresses assigned to them. Noe that they are not part of the same cluster yet. Each of them has a single pod deployed. However, if you look at their network addresses, you can see that they are the same.

This is not going to work well when the nodes are part of the same cluster. The pods have the same IP addresses assigned to them and that will lead to IP conflicts in the network.

Now that's one problem. When a kubernetes cluster is setup, k9s does not automatically setup any kind of networking to handle these issues. As a matter of fact, k9s expects us to setup networking to meet certain fundamental requirements. Some of these are that all the containers or pods in a k0s cluster must be able to communicate with one another without having to configure NAT. All nodes must be able to communicate with containers and all containers must be able to communicate with the nodes in the cluster.

Kubenetes expects us to setup a networking solution that meets these criteria.

Fortunately, we don't have to set it up all on our own as there are multiple prebuilt solutions available. Some of the mare the cisco ACI networks, Cilium, Big Cloud Fabric, Flannel, Vmware NSC-t and Calico. 
Depending on the platform you are deploying your k0s cluster on, you may use any of these solutions. For example, if you were setting up a kubernetes cluster from scratch on your own systems, you may use any of these solutions like Calico, Flannel, etc. If you were deploying on a VMware env, NSX-T may be a good option. In our demos in this course, we use `Calico`. 

