# Services

In this lecture, we will discuss about Kubernetes Services.

## Services

Kubenetes Services enable communication between various components within and outside of the application. Kubernetes Services help us connect applications together with other applications or users. For example, our app has groups of pods running various sections, such as a group for serving front-end load to users, another group running backend processes, and a third group connecting to an external data source. It is `Services` that enable connectivity between these groups of pods. Services enable the front-end application to be made available to users, it helps communication between backend and frontend pods, and helps in establishing connectivity to an external data source. Thus, services enable loose coupling between microservices in our application.

Let's take a look at one usecase of Services. So far, we talked about how pods communicate with each other through internal networking. Let's look at some other aspects of networking in this lecture. Let's start with external communication. So we deployed our pod having a web app running on it. How do we (external user) acces the web page? First of all, let's look at the existing setup. The kubernetes node has an ip address of 192.168.1.2. My laptop is on the same network as well, so it has an IP 10.244.0.2. Clearly, I can't ping or access the pod at address 10.244.0.2 as its in a separate network. So what are the options to see the webpage?

First, if we were to SSH into the k9s node @ 192.168.1.2, from the node, we would be able to access the POD's webpage by doing a curl or if the node has a GUI, we could fire up a browser and see the webpage in a broswer following the address `http://10.244.0.2`. But this is from inside the kubernetes Node and that's not what I really want. I want to be able to access the webserver from my own laptop without having to ssh into the node and simply by accessing the ip of the kubernetes node. So we need something in the middle to help us map requests to the node from our laptop through the node to the pod running the web container.

That is where the kubernetes service comes into play. The kubernetes service is an object just like pods, replicaset, or deployments that we worked with before. One of its usecase is to listen to a port on the node and forward requests on that port to a port on the pod running the web application. This type of service is known as a `NodePort` service becuase the service listens to a port on the Node and forwards requests to pods. There are other kinds of servicees available which we will now discuss.

## Service Types

The first one is what we discussed already - `NodePort` where the service makes an internal pod accessible on a port on the Node. The second is `ClusterIP`, and in this case the service creates a virtual IP inside the cluster to enable communication between different services such as a set of front-end servers to a set of backend servers. The third type is a `LoadBalancer`, where it provisions a load balancer for our service in supported cloud providers. A good example of that would be to distribute load across different web servers. We will now look at each of these in a bit more details.

### NodePort

Getting baack to `NodePort`, we saaid that a service can help us by mapping a port on the Node to a port on the Pod.

Let's take a closer look at the service. If you look at it, there are 3 ports involved. The port on the pod where the actual web server is running is port 80, and it's referred to as the `targetPort` because that's where the service forwards the requests to. The second port is the port on the service itself. It's simply referred to as the `port`. Remember, these terms are from the viewpoint of the service. The service is in fact like a virtual server inside the node. Inside the cluster it has its own ip address, and that ip address is called the cluster-ip of the service. And finally we have the port on the node itself which we use to access the webserver externally. And that's known as the `NodePort`. As you can see it's 30008. That's because NodePorts can only be in a valid range which is from 30000 to 32767.

Let's look at how to create the service. Just like how we created a Deployment, ReplicaSet, or Pod, we will use a definition file to create a Service.

The high level structure remains the same. As before we have `apiVersion`, `kind`, `metadata`, and `spec` sections.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
    name: myapp-service
spec:
    type: NodePort
    ports:
    - targetPort: 80
      port: 80
      nodePort: 30008
```

The `spec` is the most crucial part of the file as this is where we will be defining the actual services. In the spec section of a service we have `type` and `port`s. The type refers to the type of service we are creating. As discussed before it could be `ClusterIP`, `NodePort`, or `LoadBalancer`. In this case, since we are creating a NodePort, we will set it as `NodePort`. The next part of spec is ports. This is where we put information regarding what we discussed earlier. The first type of port is the `targetPort`, which we will set to 80. The next one is simply `port`, which is the port on the service object and we will set that to 80 as well. The third is `NodePort` which we will set to 30008 or any number in the valid range. Remember that out of these, the only mandatory field is `port`. If you don't provide a targetPort, it is assumed to be the same as `port` and if you don't provide a nodePort, a free port in the valid range between 30000 and 32767 is automatically allocated. Also note that ports is an array. You can have multiple such port mappings within a single service.

So we have all the information in, but something is really missing. There is nothing here in the definition file that connects the service to the pod. We have simply specified the targetPort but we didn't mention the targetPort on which pod. There could be hundreds of other pods with web services running on port 80, so how do we do that?

As we did with the ReplicaSets, a technique that you will see very often in kubernetes, we will use labels and selectors to link these together. We know that the pod was created with a label. We need to bring that label into this service definition file.

So we have a new property in the spec section and that is `selector`. Under the spector, provide a list of labels to identify the pod. For this refer to the pod definmition file used to create the pod. This links the service to the pod. Once done, create the service using `kubectl create` command and and specifying the service definition file.

To see the created service, run the `kubectl get services` command that lists the services, their ClusterIP and the mapped ports. The type is `NodePort` as we created and the port on the node automatically assigned is 32432. We can now use this port to access the web service using curl or a web browser.

So far we talked about a service mapped to a single pod. But that's not the case all the time! what do you do when you have multiple pods? In a production environment, you have multiple instances of your web application running for high-availability and load balancing purposes.

In this case, we have multiple similar pods running our web application. They all have the same labels with `app=myapp`. The same label is used as a selector during the creation of the service. So when the service is created, it looks for matching pods with the labels and finds 3 of them. The service then automatically selects all the 3 pods as endpoints to forward the external requests coming from the user. You don't have to do any additional configuration to make this happen. And if you are wondering what algorithm it uses to balance the load, it uses a random algorithm. **Thus the service acts as a built-in loadbalancer to distribute load across different pods.**

And finally, let's look at what happens when the pods are distributed across multiple nodes. In this case, we have the web app on pods on separate nodes in the cluster. When we create a service, without us having to do any kind of additional configuration, kubernetes creates a service that spans across all the nodes in the cluster and maps the target port to the sampe NodePort on all the nodes in the cluster. This way, you can access your application usign the IP of any node in the cluster and using the same port number which in this case is 30008.

To summarize, in any case whether it be a single pod in a single node, multiple pods on a single node, multiple pods on multiple nodes, the service is created exactly the same without you having to do any additional steps during the service creation. When pods are removed or added the service is automatically updated making it highly flexible and adaptive. Once created you won't typically have to make any additional config changes.


